Data Processing
-----------------

Batch Processing:


Batch Processing : Batch processing refers to processing of high volume of data in batch within a specific time span. 
It processes large volume of data all at once. Batch processing is used when data size is known and finite. 
It takes little longer time to processes data. It requires dedicated staffs to handle issues. Batch processor processes data in multiple passes. 
When data is collected overtime and similar data batched/grouped together then in that case batch processing is used. 

Challenges with Batch processing :

-->Debugging of these system is difficult as it requires dedicated professional to fix the error.
-->Software and training requires high expenses initially just to understand batch scheduling, triggering, notification etc.



Real-Time Processing:

Real-time processing is defined as the processing of unbounded stream of input data, with very short latency requirements for processing — measured in milliseconds 
or seconds. This incoming data typically arrives in an unstructured or semi-structured format, such as JSON, and has the same processing requirements as 
batch processing, but with shorter turnaround times to support real-time consumption.

Processed data is often written to an analytical data store, which is optimized for analytics and visualization. 
The processed data can also be ingested directly into the analytics and reporting layer for analysis, business intelligence, and real-time dashboard visualization.

Challenges
One of the big challenges of real-time processing solutions is to ingest, process, and store messages in real time, especially at high volumes.
Processing must be done in such a way that it does not block the ingestion pipeline. The data store must support high-volume writes. 
Another challenge is being able to act on the data quickly, such as generating alerts in real time or presenting the data in a real-time (or near-real-time) dashboard.


Hybrid Processing


Hybrid data management is a process that enables enterprises to drive innovation by seamlessly sharing, accessing, and analyzing data.

You need to have a hybrid data platform to achieve this level of data management,  all types of data which is present in an organization, i.e.

structured, semi-structured, or unstructured should be easily accessed and analyzed adequately whether it is stored in a public cloud, on-premises, 
in a private cloud, open-source, or in any type.

Hybrid data management helps any business to enable seamless access, sharing, and analysis of all types of data, irrespective of its structure or its type
of storage done.

All these capabilities are achieved by integrating the technologies that enable a business to analyze a range of new data types and sources which includes 
your customer data (current and past), social and web, mobile, etc. to yield new insights.

A critical step toward this capability is the establishment of a data-centric foundation using Hybrid Data Management (HDM).

HDM approach can scale with growing organization needs, increases agility enables innovation, improves forecasting accuracy, increases predictability, 
detects new behavior patterns, and delivers information insights in context to old and new processes and applications.

HDM also fuses traditional, and big data analytics, unstructured and structured data, data in the cloud and on-premise, partner ecosystem data, and data 
from external sources.

It also encapsulates data services as APIs. In this way, HDM plays a vital role in the digital transformation of an organization.

Here are a few elements of a Hybrid Data Management Strategy:
Access Your Data – providing easy access to all data sources and types
Provide data-driven decisions to everyone
Flexibility – It supports all kind of data, workloads, and models
Better Decision making
Cloud compatibility – It should support all type of data regardless of the location
Data insights – Providing better analytics of the data
Key Benefits of a Hybrid Data Management Strategy Includes:
High-Quality Data
Better Business Insights
Improved Data Security
Conclusion
With the help of hybrid data management, various authorized users from different lines of business can securely access relevant data from any location.
