Introduction to data engineer profile
-------------------------------------

Data engineers work in a variety of settings to build systems that collect, manage, and convert raw data into usable information for data scientists and business analysts 
to interpret.Their ultimate goal is to make data accessible so that organizations can use it to evaluate and optimize their performance.


Introduction to data engineer Technologies
------------------------------------------

What are Data Engineering Tools?
1. Apache Spark
2. Apache Hive
3. Apache Airflow
4. Apache Kafka
5. Snowflake Data Warehouse 
6. Tableau
7. Power BI
Cloud-Based Data Engineering Tools
Data Engineering Tools in AWS
7. Amazon Redshift
8. Amazon Athena
Data Engineering Tools in Azure
9. Azure Data Factory
10. Azure Databricks

Data engineer role and responsibility
--------------------------------------

Here is the list of roles and responsibilities, Data Engineers are expected to perform:

1. Work on Data Architecture
They use a systematic approach to plan, create, and maintain data architectures while also keeping it aligned with business requirements. 

2. Collect Data
Before initiating any work on the database, they have to obtain data from the right sources. After formulating a set of dataset processes, 
data engineers store optimized data. 

3. Conduct Research
Data engineers conduct research in the industry to address any issues that can arise while tackling a business problem. 

4. Improve Skills
Data engineers don’t rely on theoretical database concepts alone. They must have the knowledge and prowess to work in any development 
environment regardless of their programming language. Similarly, they must keep themselves up-to-date with machine learning and its 
algorithms like the random forest, decision tree, k-means, and others. 

They are proficient in analytics tools like Tableau, Knime, and Apache Spark. They use these tools to generate valuable business 
insights for all types of industries. For instance, data engineers can make a difference in the health industry and identify patterns 
in patient behavior to improve diagnosis and treatment. Similarly, law enforcement engineers can observe changes in crime rates. 

5. Create Models and Identify Patterns
Data engineers use a descriptive data model for data aggregation to extract historical insights. 
They also make predictive models where they apply forecasting techniques to learn about the future with actionable insights. 
Likewise, they utilize a prescriptive model, allowing users to take advantage of recommendations for different outcomes. 
A considerable chunk of a data engineer’s time is spent on identifying hidden patterns from stored data. 

6. Automate Tasks
Data engineers dive into data and pinpoint tasks where manual participation can be eliminated with automation.



Introduction to data engineer technologies
-------------------------------------------

Skills Required to Become a Data Engineer
Here is the list of 7 Essential Data Engineer Skills:

1. SQL
SQL serves as the fundamental skill-set for data engineers. You cannot manage an RDBMS (relational database management system) without mastering SQL. 
To do this, you will need to go through an extensive list of queries. Learning SQL is not just about memorizing a query. 
You must learn how to issue optimized queries.

2. Data Warehousing
Get a grasp of building and working with a data warehouse; it is an essential skill. 
Data warehousing assists data engineers to aggregate unstructured data, collected from multiple sources. 
It is then compared and assessed to improve the efficiency of business operations.

3. Data Architecture
Data engineers must have the required knowledge to build complex database systems for businesses. 
It is associated with those operations that are used to tackle data in motion, data at rest, datasets, and the relationship between data-dependent processes and 
applications.

4. Coding
To link your database and work with all types of applications – web, mobile, desktop, IoT – you must improve your programming skills. 
For this purpose, learn an enterprise language like Java or C#. 
The former is useful in open source tech stacks, while the latter can help you with data engineering in a Microsoft-based stack. 
However, the most necessary ones are Python and R. An advanced level of Python knowledge is beneficial in a variety of data-related operations. 

5. Operating System
You need to become well-versed in operating systems like UNIX, Linux, Solaris, and Windows. 

6. Apache Hadoop-Based Analytics
Apache Hadoop is an open-source platform that is used to compute distributed processing and storage against datasets. 
They assist in a wide range of operations, such as data processing, access, storage, governance, security, and operations.
With Hadoop, HBase, and MapReduce, you can further your skill sets. 


7. Machine Learning
Machine learning is mostly linked to data science. However, if you can have some idea of how data can be used for statistical analysis and data modeling, 
it will serve you well during your job as a data engineer. 

